English (AU) (Spoken) [Manually Transcribed Captions]
github.com/WizardTim/WizardTim-captions
In the past I've tried to repair
low-cost consumer electronics that often
use
phenolic resin-bonded PCBs as well as
chip-on-board style ICs however the first two times that i
attempted this
the devices unfortunately did not make
it through their surgery
however in both of these situations all
that i was doing was just using hot air
to
replace some surface mount resistors and
capacitors
in somewhat closer vicinity to the chip-on-board
but despite this the chip-on-board
started to
fizz and crackle and pop and then uh
parts of the epoxy would uh
go missing and the device would stop
working so i have here
a PCB that we shall be sacrificing for
science and
this PCB is probably from about 2005
this is from a children's toy where you
press the buttons on the keypad and it
will make a bunch of sounds
but the thing that's important to us is
that it uses a chip-on-board IC
which is under this black blob here and
on the back
we can see that it's brown which is a
telltale sign that this is a phenolic PCB.
So i've got the hot air gun set at 260 °C
which is the sort of
temperature you want to use for
lead-free soldering
and i've got it pointed at that blob so
hopefully we can see some of that snap
crackle pop action
[popping sound]
yeah and that's the other thing not only
do these chip on boards not lack the
heat but these are phenolic PCBs the
lamination is nowhere near as good as
woven fiberglass PCBs
[cracking & popping sounds]
and as you can see here yeah it's developed a bit of a bump
where it's delaminated, so the lesson
here is that if you have to rework a
resin bonded PCB or do anything near
a chip on board device it's a good idea
to bake the PCB first to remove any
moisture
as well as try to use a lower
temperature
however the best course of action is to
just use a soldering iron
and if you have to desolder a multi-pin
SMT part instead of using hot air you
can just cut the leads
and take the part off that way and then
re-solder it by hand with a soldering
iron
now whilst i have this i want to
actually take a dig
at this bubble here just to see
what sort of damage it's done to the thing
and it turns out this is actually a
pretty good way of getting the blob off
you can just
get your tweezers under it and rip it
off and then you can
put the epoxy blob in some solvent for a
while
and then you can get some die shots like this
but yeah it looks like uh the first
layer of this phenolic board has
completely delaminated from all of the
other layers and it's just made this uh
bubble here and you can really see that
on the other side
of the pcb so let's do this again and
see if we can delaminate all of the
layers in this pcb
and of course i'll get that microphone
in nice and close for you so that you
can hear that nice horrific snap crackle
pop ASMR
[crackling & popping sounds]
so this shot's at 10 times speed and the
hot air gun is set to 300 ° C
and you can really see the
phenolic PCB discolor
this is pretty much why you don't want
to use a phenolic PCB for anything apart
from the
lowest cost consumer garbage because
fiberglass FR-4
is pretty much so much better in every
single way apart from cost
and even that is pretty marginal
So here I'm just gonna
break the PCB in half so we can see all
of those
layers that have hopefully delaminated
so yeah it looks like we've delaminated
all of the layers
it looks like it's made up of three
different distinct
fiber layers that have been bonded
together
interestingly the delamination here is
actually pretty extreme there's
a surprising amount of space in between
these layers that have
that's been made by the gas so i presume
either
quite a lot of moisture has been in this
PCB that's vaporized and created quite
high pressures
either that or maybe the adhesive that
bonds these layers together
maybe it's decomposing or something
which is adding to this
here's part of the PCB that hasn't delaminated and as you can see
the layers are pretty much
indistinguishable from each other
and then we've got this bit here where
the layers have just completely splayed
apart
and the three distinct layers are very
obvious you can also see the very
thin piece of solder resist on the top
as well as the very thin copper trace
so yeah i hope this video has taught you
something about
what you shouldn't do with phenolic PCBs
and chip on board devices
so hopefully you don't have to go
through the two first time failed
attempts at this
now i was also going to talk about the
moisture sensitivity level of
normal SMT components as well in this
video but i think it's gotten a little
long
so i'll leave that to a video in the
future
but as always thanks for watching